Elmer FEM is the most user friendly and capable finite element software out there which is free to use and totally non-proprietary. It functions differently from other open source FEMs like FEniCSx and deal.II by having all of the solvers pre-programmed for the user, thereby eliminating mathematical derivations and the need to program solvers. However, the mathematics of solving PDEs should still be known in order to specify the right boundary or initial conditions for the system.

Finite element methods work by solving PDEs by using fundamental properties of function spaces (mathematical theory of functions). Specifically, just like linear algebra, one can find a set of basis functions which can be used to approximate any function via the linear combination of basis functions. In using the FEM, your mesh is partitioned into tiny polygons. The basis functions are set to be simple hat functions which take on the value of 1 at each polygon vertex and 0 at all other vertices. This basis is actually inadequate to fully approximate any function because to converge on a function, infinitely many basis functions are required (additional conditions not stated). However, as the polygons which tile the mesh become finer, the error of your calculations becomes smaller. Using more identities from multivariable calculus, such as Green's Functions, the solution to most homogenous PDEs can be reduced to a system of linear equations, one at each node, using this method.

Elmer was chosen because the user does not have to worry about the finite element method, only how PDEs must be set up so that there is enough information to solve them. Moreover, Elmer has an excellent GUI and offer