Feelings are hard to express in words because they are instinctual, not learned like language is.
However, in order to have a proper relationship, one must convey their thoughts through words to the other person, nonetheless.
When you like someone, you may not open yourself up to them - act a different way - in fear that if they saw who you really were they would not like you, they would leave.
But, there is no point to a relationship if you cannot know and be known deeply. One must be completely open, and if the other person leaves, then they leave. 
This is true for a functioning relationship. But, if you want something from the other person, then it is a reasonable stance to hide your true self in order to get it, morality aside.

I do not know the best way to express one's feelings to another person. As known, attraction happens on a range from purely emotional to purely sexual, with a good amount of both in a great relationship. Sexually, I want her to look interesting and pretty. Emotionally, I would probably approach her and ask if she is available "Hey X, do you have a boyfriend?", and if she is available, then I would probably say "I have feelings for you" if she asked why. Looks wise, I am pretty good, so I am blessed with the gift of playing it safe - to simply flirt well and ask what I want with a lower rejection rate. Some people have a higher rejection rate, but rejection is just part of life, even the good looking, so I don't see it as unfair that some people have better looks than others.

Yes it is hard for some, and easier for others, just like how hitting a nail is harder with a rock than a hammer. The reality is that some people will have to work harder to drive the nail, but it is not immoral for the person with a hammer to drive the nail. I think so because the man with the hammer is trying his absolute best with the tools he has, and being the best version of yourself is not immoral. The ethical thing for the man with the hammer to do is help those with rocks make or buy a hammer. It only becomes unethical when the man with the hammer tries to block off the rest of the men from driving the nail.