# The Geometric Product

In traditional vector algebra, there was a product called "addition" which allowed us to take two vectors and build a new one via $+$
However, there is one shortcoming of linear algebra. Although we are able to build as many vectors as we please, there is no way of telling what properties these vectors have nor how they are related to each other. In the real world we may see a ladder leaning against a wall at a 60 degree angle from the floor. We could draw a vector representing the wall as a straight up arrow, and we may represent the ladder as an arrow going up and to the right. But when it comes to the math, linear algebra only tells us how to generate more vectors from these two via the tip to tail method. It cannot tell us the acute angle between the wall and the ladder; it cannot tell us about the shadow the ladder makes on the wall because it cannot tell us if two arbitrary vectors share components with each other - it can only tell us how to add and subtract them. With this system, the only way to tell if two vectors share components if a set of basis vectors is known first and these arbitrary vectors are known in terms of their basis expansions; only then can a dot product be defined, and then an additional formula between the dot product and the angle must be imposed. Later in history, even more products were imposed such as the wedge product to describe higher dimensional objects using vectors, and more matrices were invented to allow for complex geometric operations.
Geometric algebra functions differently. It still uses vectors spaces just like linear algebra, but rather than imposing many new products or formulating specialized matrices for operations, it allows for the direct multiplication of vectors via the geometric product. The geometric product has only one simple rule, from which the dot product, wedge product, and all geometric operations can be defined. In other words, just like how all numeric functions are built from multiplication and addition on the real numbers, all vector products can be built from vector addition and the geometric product between vectors. And moreover, no basis needs to be known, nor do orthogonal vectors need to be assumed, as this new algebra proves by itself that they must exist for any n-dimensional vector space.

So, the addition product allows to us take two vectors and build a new one. From this idea, we may build all the points in a vector space. But, what if I wanted to know if two vectors shared any components? If I gave you two vectors $a$ and $b$, then there is absolutely nothing the addition product can tell you about them other than you can add $a+b$ them and subtract $a-b$ them. 

There is a way to answer the question if we allow a new product with the special property that $v^2 \in \mathbb{R}$ where $v$ is a vector. $v^2$ really means $v*v$ where $*$ is the geometric product. $v^2$ is usually denoted $|v|^2$ to show that it's a number and is meant to imply distance, but it does not have to, depending on the assumed properties of the vectors.

Other than this rule which is called the contraction principle, the rest of the rules of this product are pretty standard amongst other products. Namely the geometric product is distributive, associative, scalars commute with all vectors, but is not necessarily abelian.

Essentially this product allows us to multiply two vectors together and filter out the components that they share by allowing the shared components to fall out of the product in the form of scalars. So now, we can have two vectors $a$ and $b$ and endow them with whatever properties we would like. We could say it is *true* that $b=\alpha x +x_{\perp}$ so the multiplication of $ab$ would produce $\alpha|x|^2+x x_{\perp}$, allowing us to see that they do share components or "there is a shadow of one onto the other."

But, you may again justly disagree and say that it is still unknown if $x_{\perp}$ and $x$ share any components, leading in an infinite logical circle. You would be correct, but this algebra necessarily gives a criteria for if two vectors are perpendicular (share no components). 

Let's examine this expression: $|a+b|^2$. By the contraction principle, this must produce a scalar as any vector squared is part of the real numbers. As we expand this we see that the above is equal to $a^2+b^2+ab+ba$. This must only mean that $ab+ba$ is also a scalar, a very important fact.

Two vectors that share components with each other satisfy $ab+ba\neq0$ for the following reasons. Suppose that $ab$ has a non-zero scalar part $v*v$. If we flipped the product around so that it was $ba$, then the scalar part would be the reverse of $v*v$ which is still $v*v$! Therefore, the scalar part of $ab+ba$ must be $2*v^2$ which can never equal zero. Although neither $ab$ nor $ba$ has to be fully scalar, we know from the previous paragraph that their addition must be scalar. This scalar can be nothing else than $2*v^2$, and because it can never equal zero, we have proven that non-orthogonal vectors satisfy $ab+ba\neq0$. Logically, it follows that orthogonal vectors satisfy $ab+ba=0$.

As an additional note, the orthogonal vectors as described in this algebra act like the orthogonal vectors that we see in real life. They satisfy $|a+b|=|a-b|$, as in they "divide space into two". If you square both sides and expand them, then the result is $a^2+b^2+(ab+ba)=a^2+b^2-(ab+ba)$ which further reduces to $ab+ba=0$. Doing the algebra in reverse proves the point.

Lastly, the algebra stated here in fact predicts the existence of orthogonal vectors. Suppose you have any two arbitrary, linearly independent vectors $x$ and $y$. From this we know two arbitrary linearly independent unit vectors as well (they square to one): $\hat{x}=\frac{x}{|x|^2}$ and $\hat{y}=\frac{y}{|y|^2}$. We can generate two new vectors via addition: $a=\frac{\hat{x}+\hat{y}}{2}$ and $b=\frac{\hat{x}-\hat{y}}{2}$. $ab+ba$ in fact equals zero, meaning that they are orthogonal. If you draw a picture of these two vectors, then you can clearly see that this is so in real life. Just draw two unit vectors, make a parallelogram out of them, and let $a$ and $b$ be half of the major chords of the parallelogram. This is just a base case, but we will soon see that arbitrarily many orthogonal vectors can be generated with the dot product.

The dot product and the wedge product are equivalently defined in terms of the geometric product as:
$a\cdot b \equiv \langle ab \rangle_{0}$
$a\wedge b\equiv \langle ab\rangle_{2}$
where $\langle ab \rangle_{0}$ is the scalar part, and $\langle ab \rangle_{2}$ is the unsimplifiable/undetermined part. We will get to it later, but $\langle ab \rangle_{2}$ is analogous to a two dimensional vector - a finite plane with orientation if you like. We call them bivectors. Two bivectors are equivalent if they lie in the same plane, have the same handedness, and have the same area - all these things to be explained and proven later. In traditional literature, these two products are commonly referred to as the inner or dot product and the outer or wedge product.

With the dot product defined, we may now use Gram-Schmidt orthogonalization to create n-orthogonal vectors given an n-dimensional vector space and also normalize them. With this, given only n-vectors with no assumptions other than they are linearly independent, we have found n-orthonormal bases and the relationships between vectors. This is simply linear algebra but more geometrically powerful and connected to our world.

Just a note, the grade selection operator is one of the most important operators in geometric algebra, it allows us to define the generalized wedge an dot products and also ignore large parts of complicated equations by simply selecting only for the grades we care about.

Also, what I have said "assumed properties of the vectors" may seem conflicting with why I said geometric algebra is important, but there is a big distinction between the assumptions of linear algebra and geometric algebra. Linear algebra forces one to use a basis and a dot product if they want to have it be physically viable. Geometric algebra does not force the user to assume anything other than the geometric product. All the rest of the assumptions are made by the user. It is super customizable. 

# Higher Dimensional Vectors
